uh I would like to welcome colani Nicole
up on stage uh colani is a techn
technologist and founder of an
experimental media art gallery called
transfer and has been exploring
decentralized networks and Virtual
Worlds uh in Contemporary Art since
um her focus is on supporting artists uh
with critical technology practice and
exploring alternative models of cultural
infrastructure currently she's building
the transfer archive a decentralized
Data Trust and Cooperative model for
cultural value exchange and producing a
generative documentary film uh called
Almost in real time and collaborating
with us on a project called fora which I
assume you will
mention um we can go ahead and get just
jump right in um I am a technologist
working experience design for the last
15 years um and transfer was founded in
2013 we just celebrated 10 um today I'm
going to share with you some new ideas
and it's the first time that I'm sharing
these with a live audience so I'm really
excited some of you may remember me from
the gray area
Festival 2020 during the pandemic
radical
simulation I was honored to curate in
this moment because bringing all of the
these Visionary folks together working
with simulation and virtuality in that
moment really helped us process the
early pandemic and I do believe that
great Contemporary Art reflects our
current moment and helps us understand
ourselves in the world we're living in
and because of the challenges and
tensions present with experimental media
art there has not been much visibility
for this kind of critical practice and
this is such an important space we're in
right now I just wanted to recogn
recognize that as I get into this
conversation and say thank you to Barry
for keeping this Festival transformative
for all these years and for giving me
some time today to share these new ideas
um content morning the next slide has a
very blinking animated gif graphic so if
you're sensitive to that be
aware uh this year transfer turned 10
years old uh we kicked off our
anniversary with this documentary film
production as Barry also mentioned in
the intro um and I imagined this would
be a year-long Endeavor but then I
realized that the story wasn't even
fully yet written so we produced a
trailer you can watch it at this link
and we started the process of reflecting
and my idea in starting this documentary
was about pause right so instead of
continuing the gallery program forward
with a typical grow Oro
model sort of accelerationist art World
businesses as usual I have decided to
pause my programming and spend the next
few years looking back on the last 10
years so many incredible exhibitions
happened at transfer that were way ahead
of their time before there really was an
audience for digital art which has
become popularized now and working with
these artists over the past decade has
given me a window into what's to come
our current M our current moment sort of
looming like a blurry dystopia has been
coming more into Focus for me with every
EX ition in the past 10 years and their
ideas have enriched my life and their
work is there for you too in fact most
of the work is online for everyone to
enjoy and at transfer we really believe
the more people that experience the
transformative power of a work of art
the more value it
has so we're going to be restaging all
of these amazing exhibitions for the
last 10 years updating And archiving
everything and this is what I'm here to
talk to you about today today this is an
idea I have been testing in different
iterations and versions over the past
decade in community with these artists
and with their labor and care and the
provocation is this how might we apply
these emergent tooling and efficiencies
that we're seeing in decentralized
networks to Pro to prototype a new kind
of cultural infrastructure that truly
puts how power into the hands of
artists looking back much of my work has
centered around experimenting with
solidarity models and redistribution of
wealth and power in the Contemporary Art
world and I wanted to just share some of
that background quickly before the new
stuff so the current is an experiment
that ran from 2017 to 2019 you can still
see this online atth current. art and
this was a decentralized museum back in
2017 so way ahead of collecting Dows and
the new sort of web three models that
have emerged in the past few years
and the special thing about the current
was that it attempted to reverse some of
the power dynamics in museums and open
up the process of shaping cultural
Legacy to more people the current was a
museum Beyond brick and mortar so
instead of going to the museum it came
to you members were investing together
to help build the collection and then
had access to enjoy the works of art in
the home additionally we had a
decentralized storage Network that
housed the works of art and that
relationship to data having members
actually host a node watching the lights
blink and knowing they were tending to
something special that they had helped
shape that was a transformative learning
from this experiment so the current ran
for about two years was way too ahead of
its time and it was not about scale or
profit and we didn't manage to get
funding after the initial investment but
we put amazing salons together that
brought people in conversation across
art and technology for example back in
2017 we had folks from protocol Labs
speaking with curators at institutions
like the Whitney Museum of American art
and so the current resulted in a
collection of 12 artworks which you can
still see
online another model I have been
developing since 2016 which was actually
founded right here in San Francisco at
the Minnesota Street project um it was
was also supported with a brilliant
artist and technologist Harvey Moon
everything I'm showing you I can't
emphasize it enough this was all the
labor and love of these artists that
I've been so lucky to work with for all
these years um one more crazy animated
gif coming up on the next
slide um so this is the transfer
download it's an immersive exhibition
format that lets viewers engage with a
download of all of the ways that artists
are working with experimental media art
so in one exhibition you would see
generative art you would see video games
virtual worlds um and this has traveled
the world to Great institutions like the
house of electronic kst in basil the
Kronos Art Center in Shanghai Christies
in Rockefeller Plaza uh it was also
commissioned by the Toma foundation in
Santa Fe that's the installation that
you see here and we'll be coming to the
Perez art museum in Miami in 2024 I'm
really excited about that so this became
a distributed fr framework for physical
exhibitions where transfer was serving
to help build capabilities with
institutions it allowed for the creation
of so much new work at this large scale
and for many of the invited artists it
was the first time they've maybe worked
with multi- Channel video or immersive
installation so it was a really fresh
way to bring new resources into the
studio and to play with display
Technologies for artist focused
outcomes another important example is
pieces of me and this launched at the
height of
nfts and pieces of me was a proposition
that was not about money in a space
where everything else was uh it was
first and foremost about digital art
specifically art in the browser art on
the internet which is public art free
and available for all and has been a
Cornerstone of the transfer program for
the last 10 years so 50 artists at all
stages in their career as ual artists
whether emerging mid career or late
career they were all
invited represented a different um
political positions on the emergence of
nfts so whether you completely rejected
nfts as techno dystopian hyper
capital or you fully embrace them and
were ready to just shill into the
machine um we brought everyone together
and the goal was to kind of bridge the
polarizing dialogue that had already
started to emerge so early in that
movement now because has been selling
online works of art for a decade we have
well-developed contracts and
certificates of
authenticity for uh legal sale of
complex media artworks so this
methodology is backed by the
Contemporary Art Market and it is much
more sophisticated than the emerging
erc721 smart contract which was a
standard in its infancy still is with a
very superficial treatment of media art
so by partnering with left Gallery we
made some improvements to nfts we made
it optional for a collector to Mint an
nft addressing the mounting
environmental concerns voiced by artists
at that time we also experimented with a
solidarity model offering 70% of a sale
directly to the artist and another 30%
to be redistributed to all exhibiting
artists the entire show uh was treated
by time-based media Specialists and
opened up new care methods to so many
artists and what was really special
about this show was very personal
offerings both from myself but
especially from all of these artists and
the themes that are reflected in these
viewing rooms you can hop in between in
your browser are still one of the most
cathartic spaces for me to process all
of what happened um in the pandemic I
really invite you to pieces of me.
online so because of the work's strength
the show was a huge success with
curators critics and the artists and
myself found so much Community um and
Solace and space to work through the
rapid exploitation they were
experiencing in that moment
um in the end this show was not yet a
financial success so transfer placed
about a third of the works in the show
and the operational overhead to split
such small Revenue numbers with so many
parties has not yet proven viable as a
means to redistribute wealth um but
these works are still available for the
right Patron and can be enjoyed by all
online and this taught us a really
important lesson about scale and
care so all these learning have really
added up incredible results from the
Cooperative effort of transfer artists
Wade wallerstein who you all know who's
part of great area I would not be
standing here today still working on
transfer if it weren't for the support
that Wade showed and the new energy he
breathed into the gallery um so one more
bit of History before I share the new
ideas um back in 2017 I had the idea for
this system called the transfer archive
the goal was to reverse some of these
extractive power dynamics in the
Contemporary Art world you know as a
gallerist I take your inventory I hold
it in my possession I then give you a
contract that says uh 50% of everything
you uh make from your artwork comes back
to me right by the way this is an
exclusive relationship and I wondered
what if it was the other way around
right what if the artist got to give
terms to the agents they were working
with um and so uh I was also interested
in transparency and relationships you
know artists are very generous with
relationships and relationships or how
you make a sale of art so if you're
connecting another artist to someone who
can help their career these are
exchanges of mutual generosity that
really power an entire community and
have way back to the 60s this isn't
unique to transfer of course um so these
prototypes are something I just built in
material design framework and tested
them with six artists and these
learnings were also
eye-opening um and the findings really
stuck with me I knew I would need more
resources to bring them into the
world so I want to pause here on this
animated gif from Faith
Holland for me this work is a reminder
that our data has a physical end point
and that we are all perched on the edge
of a very precarious situation regarding
infrastructure and data storage data has
value culture at large is coming into
awareness of this with sort of the
recent rejection of Web 2.0 platforms
we've seen the implications of
surveillance capitalism on our lives and
our
relationships uh we're now aware of who
has access to our data and what
surveillance technology does to our
human rights and what's to be gained and
lost from granting access to our data so
this shift opens up possibilities to
change our relationship to our data and
shape a new system of value around
it web 3 and crypto in its current form
represent one very lame attempt at doing
that unfortunately much of what 3 is
built on the same systemic failures of
the system before it while claiming not
to be what's desperately needed right
now is to take the crypto out of
encryption to re-engage with the
possibilities of this tectonic shift in
culture so here's my hypothesis In This
Moment There's an opportunity to really
open up a conversation about the value
of our data and our relationship to the
infrastructures underlying our online
virtual communities
in the Contemporary Art World we're very
unique there is a well- tested and well
regarded system for appraisal of
databased artwork so now I'm playing
with the word value I'm shifting between
how we create cultural value and
thinking about financial value because
unfortunately we are embedded in late
capitalism so um in the art world we
have an economy around the valuation of
what's essentially data moving image
artwork media installation and digital
art and this has been around four
decades so applying the tooling and
principles of encryption and
transparency within the valuation of the
Contemporary Art Market can create a
very unique proposition in this
landscape and I think you'll recognize
why this vision is different from the
kind of nft trading dgen speculative
economies that
emerged so I believe that experimental
media art artists you all are the ones
who are perfectly positioned at the edge
of this cataclysmic shift in culture
we're in a position to deeply engage
with the affordances of decentralized
tooling
encryption and design around the idol uh
the ideologies of transparency Equity
sustainability and
care and this time around I'm really
curious how Studios can be compensated
for the R&D they're doing on behalf of
Tech Innovation Cycles what would Equity
look like so um these ideas and
learnings have evolved into something
called the transfer data trust a
decentralized artist archive and
peer-to-peer Network for conservation
and Care myself and my artists are
prototyping a new kind of Cooperative
structure it's based on the Perpetual
purpose trust model and the concept of
data Dows which is being popularized by
the filecoin ecosystem I'll unpack that
in a moment just for some context on
where we're at in this project this is
running at the Speed Of Trust so it
isn't fully launched yet I'm sharing
this with you before it's sort of out in
the world and in fact this is one of the
first times I'm speaking uh about it so
thank you all for bearing with me we
also um are still looking for a boost to
make this effort happen
um it's meant to be open source and
picked up by others and we think that if
it really works it works for many many
more people Beyond just transfer and our
sort of use case um and we're laying the
foundation for Galleries and the art
World At Large to exit to community I
don't know if you all are familiar with
this terminology it's being um developed
at the media economics Design Lab in
Boulder and in this case what would it
mean for a gallery to give ownership to
its artists so that's exactly what I
intend to do this is the
vision um it is meant to be hopefully
something that can cross over into other
institutions um and back to this idea of
a data
da uh this is an emergent idea um I I
prefer the word trust over Dow I think
that we've all seen decentralized
autonomous organizations evolve in such
a way where you know labor is actually
behind everything that's claimed to be
automated uh we've seen this revealed
largely as a myth so I'm more interested
in how we can automate processes and
exchanges and accountability while at
the same time rewarding and funding
human labor which is always crucial and
necessary for cultural
preservation so a data da I'm just going
to read the definition um fvm which is
the filecoin virtual machine it is the
lay L the L1 the layer one interface for
filecoin fvm data Access Control enables
the creation and management of data
centered decentralized autonomous
organizations which can govern and
monetize data access and pull returns
into a shared
treasury so the example they're using is
genomic research databases this is a
specialized set of knowledge you can
imagine access to that data would be
something that could generate Revenue um
so what might it look like to automate
that and the thing that's special right
about filecoin is that you can see that
data specific data authenticated data
has been stored for a guaranteed period
of time it gives data a place and a way
to um be sort of recorded in a new way
so mixing all these ideas together
somewhere between you know the process
of appraisal and the Contemporary Art
world this new speculative idea about
data having authenticated value and this
is the idea this is the sort of current
hypothesis of the transfer data trust um
the purpose is to retain artist proofs
in safekeeping to loan them and to
update them in perpetuity as many of you
who are media artists know files need to
be upgraded constantly in order to be
seen to be shown um so this is an
attempt to try and pull resources and do
that together um so artists retain their
works trust commitment is reviewed by
annually this is again all sort of
hypothesis now working on developing
this model out with my artists and all
the governance cooperatively and
co-designing with them uh at the layer
additionally then artists can choose to
commit inventory uh to the trust and
hopefully this is an efficient way to
loan or to sell hopefully it's also an
assurance to a collector if a work is
sold through the trust they have a
resource to come to should any questions
arise um Acquisitions also put the
artist in control of the redistribution
of their profits I think the expectation
is that you would still share part of
your profits but how might it go
directly to the individuals who did the
labor to support your practice as
opposed to the gallery or an
organization so I'm hoping to see a lot
of redistribution of wealth come out of
this kind of system of exchange um and
artists really set those
terms uh so this is the start of how
we're developing out the governance
model I'm not going to get too much into
this right now um but hopefully we're
creating a system of exchanges and
rewards and um automa sustainable ways
to find funding for humans to do the
labor of care that stewarding our
cultural Legacy really
requires I do want to show you this
prototype that came out of dweb Camp
it's running on the odd SDK and it
essentially turns your browser into a
file server to host catalogs and
research materials directly from the
decentralized artist archives so of
course this is all specul ative but it
would be very cool it proves to work so
we're going to put NAS Drives in all the
artist Studios we don't centralize that
data they keep it in their studio and
then um through well-developed protocols
we can parse that data and do all kinds
of things with it um so there's an
incredible group of collaborators who
have come together to support this
initiative um V vision is the Visionary
group of developers and designers based
out of Canada who are building something
called the everywhere computer which I
love and they have been so generous to
explore how their odd SDK can power some
of the interfaces and touch points with
the decentralized Data Trust other
collaborators I'm so grateful to be in
community with on this project are hia a
tech worker Cooperative that's not only
been running a new model of equity
sharing for Creative workers for many
years now great inspiration but has also
released some of the most impactful
efforts in web free space alongside
organizations like HEC and bosel and
further field in London also so my
communications team at Arts Equity Group
they're helping us communicate about all
these new ideas I mentioned the med Lab
at Boulder their exit to community
program so inspirational and just a
quick thank you to all the independent
researchers who have gotten into this
with me over the past few months Lauren
V hton shtick an art and law specialty
uh researcher Olivia Ross an artist and
filmmaker uh and conservator and last
but not least Regina harani who is a
time-based media specialist and the
associate curator of media art at the
Museum of the moving image in New York
City and my co-conspirator on a new
initiative called fora which Barry
mentioned at the beginning and I'm about
to debut that with you
all I hope that prototype was smooth
looks like it's still Lo loading
here just first a reminder your data has
value these are not just hard drives and
boxes this is your intellectual property
and you all are at a turning point in
history so another pause here with this
triumphant GIF from Lura Mills as we
Muse on on these ideas of resilient
infrastructures of care reversal of
power dynamics adoption audience
long-term maintenance and care of this
cultural Legacy which has really
remained as Outsider Art for so many
decades of art history now and how can
we create an open truly decentralized
cultural
infrastructure fora is our next
iteration on this experiment so this
Consortium is being seated by artist
focused organizations that are coming
together to do this specialized work out
in the open in order to demonstrate care
methods which are currently centralized
in museums and institutions private
collections namely conservation
appraisal and archival care so the idea
with fora is that transparency iteration
and solidarity are sort of fundamental
to a generation of artists it's
fundamental to the studio practice
actually and so these same ideologies
and methodologies can create
efficiencies to deepen conservation
resources and best practices for
ensuring the longevity of media
art it's going to launch next Friday
will be a hybrid physical virtual we
have quite a virtual production coming
together so please tune in
online um so this is our statement um
sure this will iterate every time we
convene fora but for the first one
keeping it simple it's really about an
intraorganizational Consortium and
convening these experts not just
conservators and museological
professionals but also Engineers
technology professionals uh cultural
anthropologists people who can comment
on the systems around um the artwork
that's being
restored and also making this all
open so here are some of the challenges
we're hoping to address loss prevention
particularly interested in decentralized
storage so I've been experimenting with
that for many years now and how that can
help us in this moment create a cultural
Legacy that is about to be lost right um
knowledge dissemination so this is how
we can bring more professionals into
this conversation I feel engineering is
so crucial to um understanding these
artworks and uh ensuring their longevity
um and then transparency and valuation
in appraisal so this is something
artists don't often get a peak into
until they're working with an agent or
already embedded into that system so how
can we open up those conversations now
um and the last is value exchange so
thinking about how we can put this all
together to create um more Equitable
value exchange models for
artists um so the format of fora it will
always occur alongside an exhibition of
time-based media art that has been
restored that physical exhibition I
think is so important we as humans need
to see and gather around new ideas to
deeply engage with them to spend time
within them so fora will always convene
around an exhibition and take a look at
a case study as a way into these
issues I'm so grateful to Onasis onx
studio for making space for this first
exhibition new sculpt is a series of
work that was first stage at transfer
Brooklyn Gallery in 2013 it was also the
first solo exhibition from artist and
Avatar laturbo abidon one of the
greatest honors to have worked with
laturbo so long ago their practice has
shifted and changed so much um and this
show was ahead of its time in so many
ways so not only did it occur across the
metaverse and the physical space of the
gallery um but it was the first time
that I sold artwork priced in Bitcoin so
as a speculative virtual artist it made
sense to L turbo that their work would
be priced in a speculative virtual
currency and this was in 2013 right we
had a mount gaau button on our website
and we sold a few of these prints for
one Bitcoin which was trading around
$200 at the time time so these are the
surface aspects of the exhibition and
they were Visionary but actually what
the artist was trying to show
us is what resonates now more than ever
for me um so new sculpt is a social
sculpture it's really embedded in the
network and is activated by
relationships so in order to go back to
New sculpt I've been spending time on
social media in the past I've been
scrolling on the timeline back to 2013
and screenshotting everything I can find
and downloading everything reading
through comments and the internet was
such a different place then I I invite
you all to to Muse on that and maybe go
back in time on your social media as
well um and and remember what those
spaces were like before they were
co-opted by marketers and corporations
and became a space of extraction they
were really a space of creation um so
you know new sculpt was about this and
laturbo had a studio called Club Rothco
inside second life and um Tumblr is the
place place where this work was
published as it was created um and the
Futures that laturbo imagined for these
SP
spaces they were um performing that
future around this exhibition and that
would have been a better internet I wish
it would have ended up like that alas
here we are so um you 2013 now these
digital objects um are something that we
understand as a culture at Large in a
different way um the center piece of the
show you see sort of a ghost of that
object it's called Rainbow 6 it's being
now looked at and um experimented with
in partnership with the NYU tendon
School of Engineering integrated design
and media program and what we're doing
is we're thinking about Unreal Engine as
an installation environment as an
installation tool and we're bringing
virtual production techniques into the
white Cube to kind of give this
sculpture a a presence and a place in a
way that's much closer to the artist's
intention in 2013 I actually just had a
flat screen with projection on two sides
to kind of give you two looks into the
world of rainbow six but now we can
really think about um you know bringing
this into a physical encounter in a
different way so this is all going to be
on view at onx Studio in Midtown and
maybe coming soon to the Bay Area as
well let's see um and this will be our
case study for fora so myself and Regina
are presenting methods ideologies and
work product to a panel of experts
um and these are conservators and
curators but also technologists the
founder of Second Life Philip rosale
will join us to talk about the community
in Second Life and the culture and how
it's evolved from 2013 to now um and
also we'll talk about appraisers to
discuss the cultural value creation uh
around this work mual canor muel conard
is the name of the appraiser that will
join us um and hopefully this gives us a
an appreciation um around some of the
complexities and nuances of how an
artist like L turbo may have been at the
Forefront uh of Contemporary Art
practices uh so the Consortium will
serve to really expand the experiment of
the transfer data
trust thank
you beyond the walls of the gallery back
into the
institution uh recognizing that the
institution will take a lot longer to
adopt some of these new methodologies
we're getting started now while we're
still prototyping them as well um so the
idea is to really bring those
interorganizational conversations
together um the next fora after this one
will convene around a work of
restoration that Regina harani is doing
with artist Ora Harvey and that's for a
solo show at the Museum of the moving
image coming up in 2024 titled my veins
are the wires your body is my keyboard
so that will be another really
interesting iteration on what this
Consortium could look like um with the
museological practices around it
um so I hope you all will join for.
media is the link um the live stream is
going to be an amazing production
multifaceted we have artist and
researcher Sarah rothberg uh
facilitating the live stream discussion
with us and we have this kind of crazy
multimedia virtual production team so it
should be really fun um and with that I
say thank
you
and